We can watch a tiny seed transform into a beautiful plant.
But what part do timing and surrounding conditions play in plant growth?
During the cold season, seeds and bulbs remain dormant.
Later, as temperatures rise and days lengthen, they bloom.
Some desert plants practically shut down during long dry periods.
It finally rains.
It's their time to grow and flower.
Some flower plants need lots of light.
Throughout the day, they turn to follow the sun.
After their flowers open, they stop moving and face east all day.
Jehovah made plants to respond to their environment at the right time.
We respond to evidence that these are the last days.
And we focus on the source of spiritual light.
Jesus said,
Likewise also you, when you see all these things, know that he is near at the doors.
See creatures, do they benefit by acting at the right time?
These are young salmon.
They start life in freshwater.
Most species migrate down river to the ocean to feed and grow.
They time the trip around the currents and available food.
Later, as adults, they're ready to head back and start the next generation.
They wait until river conditions are suitable to migrate up river.
Then, they go.
Dolphins, too, perform different activities at different times.
There's time to play.
To see what's for dinner.
And to make friends.
But there are times when a dolphin knows to act with urgency.
When threatened, the dolphin pot closes ranks to protect everyone.
Especially the young.
We stay close to one another for safety in a spiritually dangerous world.
And no matter how busy we are, we make time to be taught by Jehovah.
Look, now is the especially acceptable time.
Look, now is the day of salvation.
Jehovah gave birds inherent abilities that enable them to survive in challenging environments.
Consider emperor penguins.
How do these birds deal with their unique challenges?
And what can we learn from their sense of timing?
For many birds, the end of the Antarctic summer marks the start of a migration north to milder conditions.
But emperor penguins instinctively do the opposite.
They head south, moving deeper into the cold to breed.
Each female then lays a single egg, which is soon entrusted to the male for safekeeping.
These sights are very inhospitable.
But the emperors are prepared.
Jehovah has given them instinctive wisdom.
Before migrating south, these males had feasted and built up their fat reserves.
Because for two long months, the coldest and darkest of the year, they won't eat and will lose half their body weight while they incubate the eggs.
During this time, the females have trekked about 50 miles to the sea, and are now ready to return with food.
Just in time for when the chicks hatch.
Preparing ahead for the difficult times helps these penguins to survive, along with a young.
Now is the time for us to learn from the emperor penguin, and build up our spiritual reserves.
Before this world's dark days become even darker.
Even the stalk in the sky knows its seasons.
Bees work hard, and they have a lot to do.
How do bees and other insects get their work done on time?
Honeybees are adaptable.
They organize their foraging to save time and energy, and to visit flowers when they have plenty of nectar and pollen.
The bees' timing works out for all involved.
Plants get pollinated, and the bees make honey.
This is the sound of cicadas in eastern North America.
This variety develops underground for 17 years.
Right on time, they emerge by the billions.
They'll have just a few weeks to shed their skin and finish the most important work of their life.
To find a mate, and lay their eggs.
Whether with an adaptable routine like the honeybee, or a fixed one like the cicada, insects instinctively accomplish their work on time.
We have an important work to do, and a limited time to do it.
With a regular schedule, and by adapting it as needed, we can make wise use of our time.
Therefore, the way I'm running is not aimlessly.
The way I am aiming my blows is so as not to be striking the air.
Land mammals can stay active for long periods.
From the large to the not so large.
But all of them need some time each day to sleep.
African elephants get about two hours of sleep per day.
Horses sleep for close to three hours.
A wild sloth might doze for up to 14.
And a little brown bat can snooze for nearly 19.
But how does sleep help them?
Sleep allows the body to recuperate from the day's activities.
And some scientists believe that sleep allows their brains to reset and remove toxins.
As if giving the brain a good scrub.
It may also help to move the day's memories into long-term storage.
We humans need sleep too.
The younger we are, the more we need.
We are not made to work constantly without sufficient rest and balanced recreation.
And unlike animals, we need time to refresh our faith and confidence in Jehovah.
Our friendship with him must always be the most important thing in our life.
Make sure of the more important things so that you may be flawless up to the day of Christ.